---
title: Introduction
---

This book is a <mark>work in progress</mark> guide to creating generative music
with JavaScript.

It's part learning exercise, part experiment. There already exist
[many ways](https://github.com/ciconia/awesome-music/blob/master/README.md#music-programming)
to make generative music, but this book is about learning how to create
something from scratch.

It's also an experiment, in that the results are uncertain. We can fairly easily
write a program to generate noise, and with a little work even something that
sounds vaguely like music, but can we, with just a web browser, JavaScript, and
the Web Audio API, make something that approaches the qualities of "real" music?

## Principles

To help us focus, the book has a few guiding principles:

- **Fun over rigour:** We'll take inspiration from nature and science, but also
  take some artistic license along the way.

- **Composition over sound design:** The focus will be on creating musical
  structures, with sound generation delegated to instrument samples (i.e.
  working at the note level rather than the sample level).

- **Systems over performance:** We're aiming for music that is self evolving and
  requires no interaction from us or the listener (i.e.
  [procedural music](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Generative_music#Creative/procedural)
  in contrast with [live coding](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Live_coding)).

- **Simple building blocks:** We'll build things from the ground up. As we go
  we'll encapsulate our learning into a set of modules we can plug together to
  make more sophisticated music.

## Structure

The book is structured in three parts:

### Generative

Here we explore different generative techniques/methods and how to program them
in JavaScript.

Here we define what we mean by "generative", and cover how generative processes
can be applied to creating art and music.

We'll cover how natural processes? have been applied to programming, art, music.
History: https://www.artnome.com/news/2018/8/8/why-love-generative-art

Nature of Code Biomimicry Generative algorithms Deep Learning Web of data NASA,
Geo patterns

Reas rules: https://drive.google.com/file/d/0B9h469--G5OwOGVfVmUxZUQ5VzA/view

[The Nature of Code](https://natureofcode.com/)

- [**Randomness:**](generative/randomness) TODO: Summary

- [**Recursion:**](generative/recursion) TODO: Summary

- [**Evolution:**](generative/evolution) TODO: Summary

- [**Web of Data:**](generative/data) TODO: Summary

- [**Machine Learning:**](generative/machine-learning) TODO: Summary

### Music

In the first part of the book, we start by covering the building blocks of
music, and how to program them in JavaScript with the Web Audio API.

Next, we move on to look at how to actually program the building blocks of
music. We'll use the tools we create here throughout the rest of the book so we
can express our ideas more fluently.

- [**Notes:**](elements/notes) TODO: Summary

- [**Scales:**](elements/notes) TODO: Summary

- [**Timing:**](elements/timing) TODO: Summary

- [**Sequencing:**](elements/sequencing) TODO: Summary

- [**Architecture:**](elements/architecture) TODO: Summary

Here we explain the building blocks of music: melody, harmony and rhythm.

Melody, harmony, rhythm, compare with functions + primitives.

- Scales
- Chords
- Rhythm
- Tempo/BPM/beat
- Human heart beat
- Signature BPMs (house 120, hip hop 90, dnb 140)
- Time signature
- Note lengths
- Instruments

### Examples

Here we bring our learning together to make generative music.

The core of the book is a series of examples exploring the musical potential of
different generative ideas:

- [**Walker:**](examples/walker) Taking a random walk around the keyboard.

- More...

## Code Examples

All the code examples in this book are runnable. You should be able to hear the
results (or see them in the console) when hitting the `Run` bottom in the
bottom-right corner of each code snippet.

To avoid repeating big chunks of code we've already seen, once a concept has
been introduced, we'll import relevant functions from the
[Gen.js](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@meleyal/gen) library (it's present on
every page as the `gen` global). The actual implementation might differ from the
presented examples as the library evolves, but the principles should remain
similar.

##Â Gen.js Library

A lot of the ideas are encapsulated in the Gen.js library. If you want to skip
over how things are implemented and just make music, we'll cross-reference each
of the code examples with their Gen.js counterpart. The full list of available
functions can be found in the [API Reference](api/index).
